#summary documentation for the Acorn Archimedes core
#sidebar CoreDocTOC

= Introduction =

This page has operating instructions for the Acorn Archimedes *BETA* core by Stephen Leary.

*CURRENTLY THIS CORE IS IN BETA STATUS*

_Mostly you can boot into RISCOS and use a few utilities:_

 # Basic internals are implemented. 
 # Basic Floppy disk support 
 # Sound support added but may not work in all situations.
 # The core emulates a 4Mb A3000 type machine with an ARM2a with caches disabled for now (has an A3010 style joystick interface). 
 # Core runs at ~91% of an ARM2 @ 8Mhz when using VGA Modes.
 # Some games now run. Expect issues.

If someone has an MMC driver/podule then please mention it in the forums so it can be include it in the core.


= Links =

  * [http://code.google.com/p/mist-board/source/browse/trunk/bin/cores/archimedes/ Core binaries]
  * Source code (TBA)
  * [http://opencores.org/project,amber The Amber CPU core]

= Installation =

Make sure to upgrade to the latest MiST firmware first.

Copy the Archimedes core into a root folder of the SD card. To make the MiST start with this core, rename it to `core.rbf`.

Copy a version of a RiscOS ROM into the root folder, renaming it to `riscos.rom`. 

= Floppy disk images =

Currently only one floppy disk is supported. There's no OSD support for this yet and you need to place a 819200 bytes ADF floppy disk image named `floppy0.adf` into the root directory of the SD card.

----

= OSD Menu =

If the ROM is recognized the core should boot into Risc OS.
Press *Print Screen* to open the OSD menu.

 * OS ROM: choose the RISCOS rom to use
 * Firmware & Core: change MiST core or upgrade firmware
 * Save config: save current config for next boot
 
You can move to other pages of settings by pressing the right arrow key:



== Notes ==

 * For best results it's best to use this as the startup core.
 * If the core does not start try resetting the MiST (first button next to the SD card slot) 
 * Only RISCOS 3 supports VGA. 
 * Older RISCOS versions will need a VGA to SCART at present (future versions may have a scandoubler).


== License notes ==

This core uses the Amber CPU core from OpenCores which is LGPL. 
The core itself is dual licensed LGPL/BSD. 


----

== Desktop videos ==

<wiki:video url="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h0TMT6Tp068"/>
<wiki:video url="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YG_RhA6UBnk"/>