#summary documentation for the Atari 800 core
#sidebar CoreDocTOC

= Introduction =

This page has operating instructions for the Atari 800 core.

= Links =
  * [http://www.scrameta.net/autobuild/ Core binaries]
  
= Installation =

After following the binary link above, go into the latest folder and find `atari800.rbf` located under `/mist/build_NTSC_VGA/out/` .
Copy the file to the root of an SD card, and if you will only use the SD card for this core, then also rename the file to `core.rbf`.


Create the following sub-folders in the SD card:
 * `/atari800/`
 * `/atari800/rom/`
 * `/atari800/user/`

Copy an image of the Atari800 ROM into the `/atari800/rom/` folder.

Copy games into the `/atari800/user/` folder.

----

= Controls =

 * F1: Start
 * F2: Pause
 * F3: Reset
 * F10: Cold reset
 * F11: Load new ROM
 * F12: Enter OSD menu

You can use any gamepad / joystick for games, although some games will require the use of an analog controller. These are only supported via USB, and you can use an adapter to connect a real 2600/5200 analog controller.


= OSD Menu =

Press F12 to enter the OSD Menu.

In this menu you need to move around with the keyboard arrow keys, and select with Enter.

 * *Turbo*: accelerate the core (default is 1X)
 * *Ram*: Avaiable RAM, stays at 16K
 * *Rom*: Name of the ROM being used. 
 * *Cart*: Choose a cart to load from `/atari800/user/`
 
It is possible to change the Rom path through this menu, but not necessary.

You can press F11 instead of F12 to directly go into the *Cart* option. 

When selecting a game, keep *F8* press to load disabling the BASIC bios, this improves compatibility with games (this "quirk" is from the real machine). 

Some games require using Start, which is F6.

----

= Gameplay videos =

(TBA)

----