#summary List of tested/supported displays
#sidebar CoreDocTOC

= List of displays tested with the MiST board =

Since the MiST FPGA cores have a video timing thats closely derived from the 
video timing of the original machines the resulting modes are not 100% VGA
compatible. Different screens cope differently with this. The results range
from completely unusable screens to screens that display nearly everything perfectly.

Especially all PAL modes with a vertical scan rate of 50Hz are exceeding the VGA specification which requires at least 56Hz. Some screens even support a horizontal scan rate of 15khz (TV) modes although this is way below the VGA requirement of 31.5kHz.

Please note in the comment column of single cores/video modes are not supported.

|| *Display* || *size* || *Rating* || *50Hz* || *15kHz* || *Comments* ||
|| Eizo Flexscan L568 || 17" 1280x1024 || 95% || Yes || Yes || permanent "signal out of range" message on 15kHz modes, works anyway ||
|| Dell 1908FP || 19" 1280x1024 || 90% || Yes || No || ||
|| NEC LCD 1525V || 15" 1024x768 || 40% || No || No || ||


= HDMI / upscaling options =

Using a video upscaler increases compatibility significantly, as HDMI input is generally good on most displays / TVs.

|| *Device* || *Rating * || *Output* || *50Hz* || *15kHz RGBHV* || *Comments* || *Example * ||
|| Micomsoft XRGB-Mini + Arcadeforge UMSA || 99% || HDMI || Yes || Yes || Upscales to 720p or 1080p. 15khz mode works great. 50hz mode has pink tint on C64, MSX, PCE cores. || [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1uN4RDPfnKc video] ||
|| Gonbes 8220 RGB to VGA PCB  || 75% || VGA || Yes || No || Most cores work, see [https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1P1LPndBDkcSSG9Cxco8NGMnihYyO-4FIvz1kcyZ7vi4/ Core status sheet]. || - ||
|| MINI VGA2HDMI || 10% || HDMI || Yes || No || wobbly image, worse on the C64 core || [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O7YPvfFW-gA video] ||
|| VGA+R/L TO HDMI adapter - HD2022 || 10% || HDMI || Yes || No || same upscaler chip as MINI VGA2HMDI, same issues || [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O7YPvfFW-gA video] ||

== Gonbes Notes ==
This board can upscale the image to 800x600 or 1024x768. At 640x480, it solves most scaling problems seen on several displays, so this card is a good way to make the MiST more compatible with many TVs. Caveat of this board is that many cores show an image off-centered, hiding some of the gameplay areas.


= XRGB Notes =

Sometimes the unit has trouble switching from 50 to 60hz or vice-versa, and will show a blank screen (or blue depending on settings). Restarting the XRGB will fix it.