#summary Getting started

= What you need =

The MIST board was designed for simplicity. Getting it up and running is thus pretty easy. First of all you'll need a few additional things.

Mandatory:

  * The MIST board
  * A USB keyboard
  * A micro USB phone charger for power supply (a micro USB cable connected to a USB hub or PC also works)
  * An SD card (1GB recommended)
  * A VGA screen

Optional:

  * A USB mouse
  * A classic Atari style joystick 
  * A set of PC speakers

For potential compatibility issues see the [Peripherals peripherals wiki page].

= Preparations =

First you have to prepare the SD card. Place the following files in the root directory of a standard FAT formatted SD card. You can choose to do a Atari ST or Amiga setup. It's recommanded to do the initial test with the Atari ST setup since all the required files are available for download below. The Amiga setup requires copies of copyrighted files.

== Atari ST ==

  * [http://code.google.com/p/mist-board/source/browse/trunk/bin/cores/mist/core.rbf The Atari ST FPGA core (core.rbf)]
  * [http://code.google.com/p/mist-board/source/browse/trunk/bin/cores/mist/tos.img A (Emu-)TOS rom image (tos.img)]

The Atari [http://code.google.com/p/mist-board/source/browse/trunk/bin/cores/mist/system.fnt system.fnt] can optionally be placed on the SD card and will then be used for initial boot messages (otherwise the same font as for the OSD is being used).

You may also replace the EmuTOS image with a real TOS image. Any language of version TOS 1.00, TOS 1.02, TOS 1.04 or TOS 2.06 should work. Please be aware that copyright still applies to these.

== Amiga/Minimig ==

  * [http://code.google.com/p/mist-board/source/browse/trunk/bin/cores/minimig/core.rbf The Minimig FPGA core (core.rbf)]
  * A kickstart ROM image named kick.rom (Kickstart 1.2, 1.3 and 3.1 have been tested).

= Setup =

Insert the SD card into the MIST. Connect VGA screen and USB keyboard. Finally connect the phone charger.

= Go! =

Switch the board on. It should boot into the Atari ST desktop or into the kickstart splash screen.

= Troubleshooting =

The board doesn't boot? Please read about [Troubleshooting]

= Upgrade to the latest version =

Now that you veryfied that the board is working and the Atari ST boots it's time to upgrade your board to the latest firmware and core. The latest firmware can is the one with the highest revision found at 

[http://code.google.com/p/mist-board/source/browse/trunk/bin/firmware]

To update the firmware rename the latest version to {{{firmware.upg}}} and put it onto your sd card. Boot into your Atari ST or Amiga setup and go to the {{{Firmware & Core}}} submenu, select {{{Update Firmware}}} and follow the instructions.

To use e.g. the latest Atari ST core is the one with the highest revision found at 

[http://code.google.com/p/mist-board/source/browse/trunk/bin/cores/mist].

To replace the core simply rename the new version to {{{core.rbf}}} and replace the old version already on your SD card. 

Some information about the updates and changes these bring can be found at 

[http://www.atari-forum.com/viewtopic.php?f=101&t=26513 the firmware and core changelog thread].

= Things to do next =

Once the board works there are many things to explore:

  * Connect a USB keyboard and press F12 (or the menu key) to explore the on screen display (OSD)
  * Press the "NumLock" key to cycle through mouse and joystick emulation (use the cursor keys for this) 
  * Connect a USB mouse
  * Connect speakers
  * Add floppy disk images (.st format for the Atari ST and .adf files for the Amiga) to the SD card and select them via the OSD
  * Visit the [http://www.atari-forum.com/viewforum.php?f=101 MIST section in the Atari Forum], or
  * visit the [http://www.minimig.net/viewtopic.php?f=3&t=546 MIST thread in the Minimig Forum]